<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lionel Tipton, created Baron Bergamot, ann. 1686, Gentleman Usher of the Back Stairs, and afterwards appointed Warden of the Butteries and Groom of the King’s Posset (on the decease of George, second Viscount Castlewood), accompanied his Majesty to <abbr>St.</abbr> Germain’s, where he died without issue. No Groom of the Posset was appointed by the Prince of Orange, nor hath there been such an officer in any succeeding reign. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To have this rank of Marquis restored in the family had always been my Lady Viscountess’s ambition; and her old maiden aunt, Barbara Topham, the goldsmith's daughter, dying about this time, and leaving all her property to Lady Castlewood, I have heard that her ladyship sent almost the whole of the money to King James, a proceeding which so irritated my Lord Castlewood that he actually went to the parish church, and was only appeased by the Marquis’s title which his exiled Majesty sent to him in return for the £15,000 his faithful subject lent him. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>My mistress, before I went this campaign, sent me John Lockwood out of Walcote, who hath ever since remained with me.⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">H. E.</abbr> <a href="chapter-2-9.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This passage in the Memoirs of Esmond is written on a leaf inserted into the <abbr>MS.</abbr> book, and dated 1744, probably after he had heard of the Duchess’s death. <a href="chapter-2-10.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our Grandfather’s hatred of the Duke of Marlborough appears all through his account of these campaigns. He always persisted that the Duke was the greatest traitor and soldier history ever told of: and declared that he took bribes on all hands during the war. My Lord Marquis (for so we may call him here, though he never went by any other name than Colonel Esmond) was in the habit of telling many stories which he did not set down in his memoirs, and which he had from his friend the Jesuit, who was not always correctly informed, and who persisted that Marlborough was looking for a bribe of two millions of crowns before the campaign of Ramillies. And our Grandmother used to tell us children, that on his first presentation to my Lord duke, the Duke turned his back upon my Grandfather; and said to the Duchess, who told my lady dowager at Chelsey, who afterwards told Colonel Esmond⁠—“Tom Esmond’s bastard has been to my levee: he has the hang-dog look of his rogue of a father”⁠—an expression which my Grandfather never forgave. He was as constant in his dislikes as in his attachments; and exceedingly partial to Webb, whose side he took against the more celebrated general. We have General Webb’s portrait now at Castlewood, Va. <a href="chapter-2-15.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>’Tis not thus <em>woman loves</em>: <abbr>Col.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">E.</abbr> hath owned to this folly for a <em>score of women</em> besides.⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R.</abbr> <a href="chapter-2-15.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>And, indeed, so was his to them, a thousand thousand times more charming, for where was his equal?⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R.</abbr> <a href="chapter-2-15.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What indeed? Psm. xci. 2, 3, 7.⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R. E.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The managers were the Bishop, who cannot be hurt by having his name mentioned, a very active and loyal Nonconformist Divine, a lady in the highest favor at Court, with whom Beatrix Esmond had communication, and two noblemen of the greatest rank, and a member of the House of Commons, who was implicated in more transactions than one in behalf of the Stuart family. <a href="chapter-3-9.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There can be very little doubt that the Doctor mentioned by my dear father was the famous <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Arbuthnot.⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R. E. W.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3-9.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>My dear father saith quite truly, that his manner towards our sex was uniformly courteous. From my infancy upwards, he treated me with an extreme gentleness, as though I was a little lady. I can scarce remember (though I tried him often) ever hearing a rough word from him, nor was he less grave and kind in his manner to the humblest negresses on his estate. He was familiar with no one except my mother, and it was delightful to witness up to the very last days the confidence between them. He was obeyed eagerly by all under him; and my mother and all her household lived in a constant emulation to please him, and quite a terror lest in any way they should offend him. He was the humblest man with all this; the least exacting, the more easily contented; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Benson, our minister at Castlewood, who attended him at the last, ever said⁠—“I know not what Colonel Esmond’s doctrine was, but his life and death were those of a devout Christian.”⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">R. E. W.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3-10.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This remark shows how unjustly and contemptuously even the best of men will sometimes judge of our sex. Lady Castlewood had no intention of triumphing over her daughter; but from a sense of duty alone pointed out her deplorable wrong.⁠—<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">H. E.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3-10.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In London we addressed the Prince as Royal Highness invariably, though the women persisted in giving him the title of King. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
